I bought an Intel Compute Stick for a couple of reasons. Partially, because, it was fifty dollars. That's not a lot of money to pay for a whole computer. Why not, right? But, principally, I just thought it was cute.  

	Mine is one of the later models. Pretty sparse on the outside– it’s got just two USB ports, an SD card reader, and, for power, USB Micro-B. On the inside, there’s a four core Intel Atom CPU, 32 GB eMMC storage, and just 2 gigs of DDR3 RAM. Just imagine trying to run Windows 10 on this thing, the operating system that it shipped with! Even while running whatever version it was contemporary with, it surely would have been pretty miserable.

	I bought it mostly just to have, but I had ideas. Initially, the move was to put Tiny Core Linux on it, and document the process for a Youtube video. I didn’t have much experience with Linux at that point. But, I did previously get Mint running on an old Thinkpad I got second hand. So the project seemed straightforward.
	
	Going into it, all I really knew about Tiny Core was that it was small. It’s so small, that the whole thing quite literally fits in your RAM. This makes it fast and responsive even on ancient hardware. It accomplishes this by replacing the “GNU” part of “GNU/Linux” with BusyBox, a piece of software which does many of the same things, just in a much lighter package. Though I didn’t really know what this meant at the time. My thinking was more along the lines of, small computer, small operating system. It made sense to me at the time.

	For my first blush at this, I used the aforementioned Thinkpad to merely burn the Tiny Core ISO onto a flash drive. Then, to see if it worked, I  restarted the laptop with the drive still in it to boot from the flash drive. Which, worked! Great! Then, I took that small stick with the fresh ISO on it, and then plugged it into the other, slightly larger stick, turned it on, and… It didn’t boot. The image was there, and the computer was checking the drive. I saw the  little red light blinking  on the drive, every time I turned the computer on. I dug around in the BIOS a little bit, but I didn’t find much. Secure boot? I toggled it off and on a few times. Nothing changed. There was a setting that toggled between “Windows” and “Android.” No clue what that did, but I tried it anyways. No dice. Finally, probably, the strangest option of all, a firmware bitness toggle, 32-bit and 64- bit. This absolutely blew my mind.  The processor was 64 bit, and it had more than enough RAM. What the fuck did this do?

	Turns out, one other thing I didn’t understand was UEFI. At that time, my knowledge of it was “This thing replaced BIOS. It works basically the same. It’s just fancier, or something.” That’s not really true, but, if all you’ve ever done is install Windows on your machine, or, even some mainstream Linux distro, it may as well be. If you do have to learn about it though, you’ll quickly discover that the standard is a mess.

	I started with lots of Googling. Googling and forum posts. I don’t recall very much about this stage. I was stuck in a cycle of reading something someone said and then just trying it if it sounded plausible enough. I couldn’t tell you exactly which things I tried, or how many times I tried them. But I promise you, I was very busy.  Just, imagine a guy periodically looking up from his phone to tap furiously at a keyboard every few minutes, and then back down to his phone when the typing didn’t work. For hours.

	One of the earliest developments was Rufus, an ISO flashing tool that a lot of people will swear by. This didn’t work either. BUT, it was a big leap forward. Because, well, something booted. It wasn’t Linux, but it wasn’t nothing, so I was excited. That “not nothing” was GRUB 2. I had to learn what that is, and how it worked. It is, apparently, the most popular bootloader in the Linux world. If you don’t know what bootloader means, in short, your computer boots the bootloader, and the bootloader boots your operating system. 

	GRUB has a very nice feature, where, if it doesn’t load correctly, it’ll put you into an environment where you might be able to find your way to the operating system, on your own, if you’re savvy enough. Some (probably most) Linux installers are packaged with a bootloader of some variety, Tiny Core is not. This was entirely a Rufus thing. And Rufus’s implementation of GRUB was either entirely borked, or just didn’t like Tiny Core. Either option is equally plausible. That special environment I mentioned, hinges entirely on being able to read the disks on the system. In this case, it really should have been able to. But it simply couldn’t, for whatever reason. I further putzed around with GRUB a little bit, but it was a non-starter, ultimately.

	After more reading and toil, I learned about a piece of software called “YUMI UEFI.” The idea here being, you load this up on your flash drive, alongside a bunch of ISOs, select an image at boot, and you’re good to go. This actually, did just straight up work for me. I got into Tiny Core without issue. Absolutely fantastic! It took me forever, but mission accomplished!

	It’s great that I could get into Tiny Core from a flash drive and everything. But, that wasn’t enough for me. I wanted to get into Tiny Core from the stick itself. This, also, was a whole can of worms. Installing GRUB to the eMMC from Tiny Core didn’t work. And, as a matter of fact, I ran into the exact same problem as with Rufus’s GRUB! Interesting! I tried some other bootloader, but that didn’t work either.

	Finally, I installed something called “rEFInd.” No mere bootloader, this was a *boot manager*. Which, if I have my facts right, is just a bootloader but with graphics. Installing it was kind of a hassle, but it did work for me, right from the storage soldered to the stick itself. When I say rEFInd “worked” for me, I mean that in the sense of, it did its job of managing the boot, not that I got into Tiny Core with it. See, what would happen is, rEFInd would successfully hand things off to the kernel. But, upon being passed the baton, the kernel didn’t know what the hell to do with it, so it would panic, and crash.

	I don’t remember what the kernel was actually complaining about, but, I do remember NOT seeing the eMMC storage, when it printed all of the available disks after panicking. I didn’t do a lot of troubleshooting after this, but I’m 99% sure this just means the kernel just doesn’t know how to talk to the eMMC at the point where it needs to. By all accounts, this is fixable with kernel patches. But, at that point, a kernel patch was well beyond what I could do. I could do it now, if I wanted to, but it’s not worth it.

	As of writing this, the Intel Compute Stick is a happy little Debian server, that I use primarily for listening to the radio. So, it didn’t really work out. But that’s okay. I learned a lot in the process. Those lessons are frankly more interesting than the struggle I went through to learn them. I feel like some of the effect is lost if I just skip to the “good part,” and well, I have stop writing at some point. So we’ll stop here, and maybe I’ll share my wisdom another time.
